---
categories: code
date: "2013-07-05T00:00:00Z"
title: 'qc: quick calculator'
aliases:
    - /code/2013/07/23/qc.html
tags:
    - code
    - python
    - bash
---

If you spend most of your time in the command line, you don't want to leave to do math. Qc is a script that does in-line command line math without forcing you to exit the main bash prompt as you might with a program like `bc` or a language interpreter.

{{< highlight bash >}}

#!/bin/bash
python -c "print $1"

{{< / highlight >}}

Make the script executable with the command:

{{< highlight bash >}}

$ chmod +x qc.sh

{{< / highlight >}}

Alias it to `qc` by editing the `.bash_profile` file in your home folder and adding the code:

{{< highlight bash >}}

alias qc="~/path/to/qc.sh"

{{< / highlight >}}


Use qc as follows:

{{< highlight bash >}}

$ qc 7-8
-1
$ qc 9.8-1
8.8
$ qc 2**4
16

{{< / highlight >}}

In reality, this script is just a glorified alias of `python -c`, but importing the math library makes this command considerably more powerful.

{{< highlight bash >}}
#!/bin/bash
python -c "from math import *; print $1"
{{< / highlight >}}

This wildcard import gives access to constants such as `pi` and `e` in calculations, but more notably, it also allows for the use of functions in calculations. For example:

{{< highlight bash >}}

$ qc "factorial(10)"
3628800
$ qc "hex(255)"
0xff
$ qc "sin(pi/7)"
0.433883739118

{{< / highlight >}}

Because qc is executed in bash, it requires quotes (single or double) to be placed around expressions with functions, since bash will try to evaluate expressions in parentheses before it does anything else. The quotes tell bash to pass the entire expression as a whole to `qc` instead of trying to evaluate part of it beforehand.

Finally, once you have the result of a calculation, the `pbcopy` command places the result in the clipboard for ease of use.

{{< highlight bash >}}

#!/bin/bash
# code for OSX
python -c "from math import *; print $1" | pbcopy
pbpaste # show the result in bash

{{< / highlight >}}

On Linux, a few lines of python will accomplish the same task.

{{< highlight bash >}}

#!/bin/bash
# code for Linux 
python -c "from math import *
import pygtk
pygtk.require('2.0')
import gtk
evaluated = $1
clipboard = gtk.clipboard_get()
clipboard.set_text('%s' % str(evaluated))
clipboard.store()
print evaluated"

{{< / highlight >}}

Edit 7/23: changed `eval` to `evaluated` in the code to avoid conflict with the bash builtin.

The script determines which copy commands to use based on your OS. The full script is available on [Github](https://github.com/danielcorin/qc).
